.TH MA 3 "3 February 1994" "MA Release 1.7" "MA LIBRARY ROUTINES"
.SH NAME
MA -
introduction to the MA dynamic memory allocator
.SH DESCRIPTION
MA is a library of routines that comprises a dynamic memory allocator
for use by C, FORTRAN, or mixed-language applications.
FORTRAN applications require such a library
because the language does not support dynamic memory allocation.
C applications can benefit from using MA
instead of the ordinary malloc() and free() routines
because of the extra features MA provides:
both heap and stack memory management disciplines,
debugging and verification support,
usage statistics,
and quantitative memory availability information.

MA is designed to be portable across a variety of platforms.
The following platforms are currently supported:

.in +0.5i
.nf
delta_pgi40     Intel DELTA, NX/M R1.5 (compiled with PGI 4.0)
ipsc_pgi40      Intel iPSC/860, NX/M R1.4 (compiled with PGI 4.0)
ksr1_1141       KSR1, KSR OS R1.1.4.1
ksr1_1141_i4    KSR1, KSR OS R1.1.4.1, f77 -i4
ksr1_1141_i4r8  KSR1, KSR OS R1.1.4.1, f77 -i4 -r8
ksr1_1141_r8    KSR1, KSR OS R1.1.4.1, f77 -r8
rs_aix32        IBM RS/6000, AIX 3.2
sgi_405f        SGI, IRIX 4.0.5F
sgi_5111        SGI, IRIX 5.1.1.1
sun4m_412       SPARC, SunOS 4.1.x
.fi
.in
.SH IMPLEMENTATION
Memory layout:

.in +0.5i
.nf
segment = heap_region stack_region
region = block block block ...
block = AD gap1 guard1 client_space guard2 gap2
.fi
.in

A segment of memory is obtained from the OS upon initialization.
The low end of the segment is managed as a heap; the heap region
grows from low addresses to high addresses.  The high end of the
segment is managed as a stack; the stack region grows from high
addresses to low addresses.

Each region consists of a series of contiguous blocks, one per
allocation request, and possibly some unused space.  Blocks in
the heap region are either in use by the client (allocated and
not yet deallocated) or not in use by the client (allocated and
already deallocated).  A block on the rightmost end of the heap
region becomes part of the unused space upon deallocation.
Blocks in the stack region are always in use by the client,
because when a stack block is deallocated, it becomes part of
the unused space.

A block consists of the client space, i.e., the range of memory
available for use by the application; guard words adjacent to
each end of the client space to help detect improper memory access
by the client; bookkeeping info (in an "allocation descriptor,"
AD); and two gaps, each zero or more bytes long, to satisfy
alignment constraints (specifically, to ensure that AD and
client_space are aligned properly).
.SH "LIST OF ROUTINES"
All MA routines are shown below,
grouped by category
and listed alphabetically within each category.

Initialization
.in +0.5i
.nf
MA_init()
MA_sizeof()
MA_sizeof_overhead()
.fi
.in
Allocation
.in +0.5i
.nf
MA_alloc_get()
MA_allocate_heap()
MA_get_index()
MA_get_pointer()
MA_inquire_avail()
MA_inquire_heap()
MA_inquire_stack()
MA_push_get()
MA_push_stack()
.fi
.in
Deallocation
.in +0.5i
.nf
MA_chop_stack()
MA_free_heap()
MA_pop_stack()
.fi
.in
Debugging
.in +0.5i
.nf
MA_set_auto_verify()
MA_set_error_print()
MA_set_hard_fail()
MA_summarize_allocated_blocks()
MA_verify_allocator_stuff()
.fi
.in
Iteration Over Allocated Blocks
.in +0.5i
.nf
MA_get_next_memhandle()
MA_init_memhandle_iterator()
.fi
.in
Statistics
.in +0.5i
.nf
MA_print_stats()
.fi
.in
.SH TYPES
There are three MA-specific types in the public C interface to MA:
Integer, Boolean, and Pointer.
They are accessible by including macdecls.h.
Integer is defined in such a way that sizeof(Integer)
is equal to the number of bytes in a FORTRAN integer,
which varies according to compiler options and platform.
Boolean is equivalent to Integer,
and Pointer is equivalent to char *.
.SH ERRORS
Errors considered fatal by MA
result in program termination.
Errors considered nonfatal by MA
cause the MA routine to return an error value to the caller.
For most boolean functions,
false is returned upon failure and true is returned upon success.
(The boolean functions for which the return value
means something other than success or failure are
MA_set_auto_verify(),
MA_set_error_print(),
and MA_set_hard_fail().)
Integer functions return zero upon failure;
depending on the function,
zero may or may not be distinguishable as an exceptional value.

An application can force MA to treat all errors as fatal
via MA_set_hard_fail().

If a fatal error occurs,
an error message is printed on the standard error (stderr).
By default,
error messages are also printed for nonfatal errors.
An application can force MA to print or not print
error messages for nonfatal errors
via MA_set_error_print().
.SH FILES
To access required MA definitions,
C applications should include macdecls.h
and FORTRAN applications should include mafdecls.h.

.nf
Include files: /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/include
Library:       /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/lib/\fIplatform\fR/libma.a
Man pages:     /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/man/man3
Source code:   /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/tar/ma\fIrelease\fR.tar
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.na
MA_alloc_get(3),
MA_allocate_heap(3),
MA_chop_stack(3),
MA_free_heap(3),
MA_get_index(3),
MA_get_next_memhandle(3),
MA_get_pointer(3),
MA_init(3),
MA_init_memhandle_iterator(3),
MA_inquire_avail(3),
MA_inquire_heap(3),
MA_inquire_stack(3),
MA_pop_stack(3),
MA_print_stats(3),
MA_push_get(3),
MA_push_stack(3),
MA_set_auto_verify(3),
MA_set_error_print(3),
MA_set_hard_fail(3),
MA_sizeof(3),
MA_sizeof_overhead(3),
MA_summarize_allocated_blocks(3),
MA_verify_allocator_stuff(3)
.ad
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory S. Thomas, Pacific Northwest Laboratory
